https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7TldZT7CwJ0
Novak Djokovic: How a Champion's Mindset Works
The Glitch Global

Intro
What is the best advice you've ever
heard or received?
Live the life in the present moment,
learn from the past, live in the
present, and work for the future.
 The Divine Intervention
The success that I have achieved is not
only due to my father or my parents or
myself. It's also the divine higher
force. I strongly believe that there was
an intervention
and there still is. There's higher
forces in power that were helping me in
some of the most difficult moments in my
family as well. I am a man of faith and
I really truly believe in God and a
higher spiritual force that intervenes
in the most difficult moments if you
open your heart, if you pray, and if you
believe in it. So, I felt it on my own
skin. Jay, to be honest, I really don't
know how I won certain matches. I cannot
explain it. Even with my team after I
would finish a Grand Slam final against
Roger Feather in 2019, Wimbledon when he
was a far better player, I saved some
match points and I came off the court,
all stats were going his way. I won the
match and I just said, you know, and I
wasn't playing well. I wasn't feeling
well on the court and I was just like
struggling and scrambling and trying to
stay out there, stay alive. And I won in
the end in one of the most epic finals
in history of tennis. And then, you
know, I told to my parents and my family
and my my team, I said, and my wife, I
said, I don't know how I won this match.
I have no idea. At the same time, I do
know deep inside that there there's that
connection happening and that that
there's also that help. So that there's
a mix of things. It's really hard to
explain sometimes. There's this divine
power that really if you allow it, if
you believe it, that really helps you
come out of of a trouble and and achieve
things. So it's it's a constant process
really. I I don't see myself fully
 There's Something More Inside of You
satisfied if if that's maybe a shorter
answer because I have that part of me
which is like uh you know I think I can
still do more but I'm the other side of
me is like of course I'm fully I'm happy
and I'm proud and in a way I can't wait
one day for me to reflect on everything
but while I'm still in my active career
I don't have time because a lot of
people even closest people in my life
ask me you know what more do you want
you know you have achieved everything
what do you want what why why do you
keep going and I tell them the the good
part that I told you that I still really
strongly feel it's inside of me and I
feel like as long as I have the capacity
or or ability to compete for the biggest
titles in in my sport I want to keep
going and also partly the part that I
didn't mention that inspires me to keep
going is to test my limit limits
mentally and physically and it's all
about practice everything I mean brain
is a muscle like any other even
 Tap Into Your Subconscious Mind
consciousness that comes naturally to us
I mean we are conscious spiritual beings
we are souls on this planet in this body
but in order for us to connect with our
true self we need to go through these
layers the constructs of the society
that has developed us in a way has
shaped us and that requires practice on
on a daily basis. And that's not easy.
Look, it's it's not easy not switching
on your phone or your TV the first thing
in the morning, but doing something that
is maybe not as healthy, but being
devoted to that practice or, you know,
during the day having that little 1 2 5
10 20 minute rest time and comprehension
time. It's not easy to do that,
especially for people that didn't
develop that kind of habit. It doesn't
come naturally. I was saying this years
ago uh after I was playing I was playing
feather in one of the Wimbledon finals
and they would cheer Roger Roger all the
time basically. So I've was convincing
myself and I managed to convince myself
especially in the second part of the
match that they were cheering no no or
Novak Novak I was that's what I was
hearing and in my mind was playing games
but I wasn't allowing it to play games
with me that basically was like what are
you talking about? I mean, they're
saying Roger, they're saying Novc, but I
was like, "No, no, no." They're saying
Novak, Novak, Novak, Novak. So, I was
using that as my own force, in my own
fuel.
I just got chilled.
And then, but that's it is possible. It
is possible but you you need to you need
to work on that and convincing yourself
in something that is different from the
reality that is actually happening or
basically in another words creating your
own reality because in the end that's
more a philosophical question and
spiritual whether this is all one
reality or it's a different real we all
experience different forms of reality of
what's happening. So creating your own
reality and convincing yourself and
basically training your subconscious
mind that this is exactly what you want
to hear. It is possible but it takes an
effort. Uh but but it it goes a long way
because for everyday person you know you
can tap into that subconscious mind that
basically controls 95% of your 100%
daily life while you're awake. You know
5% is only I mean I was shocked and
that's science. That's not me saying
it's science that is saying that 5% is
only conscious mind. 95 is I was shocked
when I heard that. It's like how in the
world are we then able to live how we
want to live where we are actually on
autopilot most of the time but
subconscious is basically reacting to
what you are instilling or uploading in
that program. So I feel like when I was
introduced to that uh subconscious mind
science I was you know I felt like I've
changed myself and my own perspective on
things and how I approach life and
performance and relationship. And I
 How to Handle Losses
thought, you know, maybe when I was at
at the peak of my career and, you know,
I felt like I'm unbeatable and I I feel
like I could do anything. You know, I
kind of walking on the water. We all
experience that in in in our own lives
in certain way. And it's a great
feeling. But then the ego takes you
places where it's it's hard to come back
from. And maybe you shouldn't come back
from that. Maybe you're trying to find
the balance, find the optimal measure
that really works for you. But it it
took me time to really accept the fact
that what I have learned, what I have
mastered, and what I'm doing on a daily
basis for the last 20 years or more is
not necessarily a guarantee that I'll
always find a way and that will always
work for me in this particular time of
my life and circumstances that I'm
facing. But you know, Kobe Bryant used
to talk about this a lot. And I when I
was talking to him personally about
that, he would cuz I tell him, Kobe, I
really don't like, you know, watching
myself perform bad or when I lost and it
just gives me this cramps in my stomach
and I don't like it. And he said even if
it's just specific intervals of the
match that you lost that you want to
watch that you definitely look at that
and you need to analyze that and you
need to go through that cramping feeling
because that's where you learn from
those those mistakes and that's where
you have an opportunity to rectify that
the next next tournament or next match
and so forth. So that helped a lot. And
I do watch the matches that I lost and
highlights and certain parts, but I
never watch the last point. I don't want
to watch the point where my opponent,
you know, fist bumps and raises his
hands. I just maybe it's I don't know
it's a superstition or not, but but it's
just some some kind of a feeling that I
have. Sometimes it takes me an hour,
sometimes half a day, sometimes a day,
sometimes a week to go over the loss. I
mean, it just really depends. But right
after the match,
you know, I would uh if I have to
reflect shortly about the match with my
team, but I just want to be left alone.
Yeah. I just have to go through my
process. I don't like the the chitchat,
the small talk of trying to lift my
spirits up right after the match. I just
like just give me some time. I need to
isolate myself. go in my room, go
outside, walk, whatever it is, you know,
just blow some steam out. And then when
I do that, then I'm ready to, you know,
talk, socialize, and stuff like this. I
don't know whether that's something that
is good or not in general terms. Uh, but
that's just me. I feel like it's really
hard for me to digest that I lost the
match. As I said, sometimes takes
longer, sometimes shorter to get out of
it.
I do need definitely like few hours to
not see anybody. I I just feel like it's
sometimes is necessary to have that and
in solitude is not necessarily bad and I
feel like we all need to learn how to
embrace being in in solitude and being
by and enjoy being by ourselves doesn't
mean that we have to go to total extreme
but it has to be balanced and optimal
but we need to create that time for
ourselves because also being bored is
good you know being bored this is
something very interesting you that I
also see with my with my kids like
particularly with my son. And then he
come up comes up to me. He's like,
"Daddy, I'm bored." And then I had him
sit down with me and then I said, "But
son, it's okay to be bored sometimes."
Second of all, you know, when you're
bored, it doesn't mean that you have to
instantly take a book or a screen or
anything else. You need to also learn
how to be with your thoughts. And if you
are not comfortable being bored indoors,
go outdoors. Sit on a chair and have
have some drink and just look at the
sky. And I and I think that's much
easier said than done. And I and I I
really would love my my children to to
be able to be okay with being bored
because that's the time when you're
actually most creative or that's the
time when you can manage your thoughts
and everything that you have been
suppressing by distracting yourself with
phone with whatever it is. They don't
have my kids don't have phones. They're
10 and seven and and that's another
conversation but you know it's it's a
struggle but it's important. when I lost
the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro in
2016, I uh was
 The Challenge of Rivalry
yeah struggling a little bit with this
injury of the wrist and didn't know if
I'm going to play or not. Uh, I played I
lost to Delotro and it was super
emotional because
Olympics playing for my country, being
supported by the whole stadium, being
probably at the peak of my career
overall, being on a on a run and on the
roll, winning four slams. I held all
four slams at that point. I was just the
most dominant I've ever was in my
career. practicing several days, I was
like, I cannot miss a ball. Like, this
is my time. This is there's no no chance
anybody beats me here. And then one day
or two days before the match, I start to
feel something in the wrist, start to
doubt myself. I start to question
whether I should go out or not. I have a
very tough draw. I draw Del Po is very
tough draw first round and I lose close
match. You know, as I said, he goes on
to win silver medal, but I that was the
moment where I just felt like my whole
world collapsed. Best moment and worst
moment happened in Olympic games because
Olympic games happen every four years.
They're so rare. And all the other
tournaments, you have a chance every
year to win, but here, you know, every
four years. So, you got to be at your
top to be able to, you know, get a
medal. Toughest opponent mentally by far
myself. And the toughest opponent
physically, Nadal. Yeah, for sure. I
mean, the battles with him were just
grueling. The longest Grand Slam finals
in history in the finals of 2012
Australian Open. 5 hours and 53 minutes,
I think it was. So, almost 6 hours of
grueling battle. I won that match in the
fifth set. 75 or 76. It was just I
remember the closing ceremony after that
we were standing and and listening to
the sponsor's speeches and stuff and we
at one point we both simultaneously bent
down and held our knees and I could see
his legs are shaking, my legs are
shaking and then I and then someone saw
that and brought us two chairs and
brought us water and we had to sit down
and sit for the rest of the ceremony
because we were just I went into the
locker room and took out my shoes and I
had blood on all over the socks on both
both socks and I didn't feel it
obviously in this adrenaline rush on the
court you just go through the pain you
go through everything and then you like
once you cool off and your muscles are
cold and everything it's just like
devastating feeling you can't walk but
you know obviously more satisfying when
you win such battle but I had incredible
matches against Nadal well cuz he you
know he was getting to every ball and I
was also very very good defender and
always and you know very physically fit.
So we would like push each other to the
very limit physically and mentally. You
know it was at times almost like an
outof body experience for both of us
where we would just everything would
flow. We would play incredible points
that would last so long exchanges and
you know when you finish a match then
you realize oh my god it's almost like
you were not playing it. It was like
something took over and just all your
talent the skill
everything was on a scale or on a
platform that we created. It's like
almost like a an artist when he goes
into his on a canvas into his zone and
just starts drawing some beautiful.
That's how it felt,
you know, many times when I played him.
And now when I talk about it and
reflect, it gives me, you know, a great
sense of pride uh and satisfaction that
I've had the rivalry that I had with him
and that, you know, I feel like not only
we both made history of the sport, but
we both made each other better. And I
feel like we brought so many incredible
emotions to people who are watching us
play. And then I'm going to keep on
doing mistakes, but I'll try to reduce
 Take Full Responsibility for Your Life
those. And I feel like being in control
is something that we all want to be in.
Like we want to control our thoughts, we
want to control our lives, our partners,
and we want to but it's not possible and
it shouldn't be the case. Like you can
only control what you can, which is your
own process internally. And then how
that comes across what I speak to you
right now and what you think in your
mind and how you hear my words is I
can't control that.
You know I can only hope that I am
emitting the right kind of energy and
vibe to you and that we are creating
something nice. That's where I feel like
we all get trapped a lot is like no I'm
going to prove you the point of what I
was saying and I'm going to tell you why
you are causing this in me and so forth.
So putting always a blame to someone
else. And I mean I can feel that with
tennis is that I can instantly see the
mistake when I actually say it's my
coach's fault or it's my physio's fault
or my fitness coach's fault or it's
whoever's fault for me losing a match or
me playing this way. So I always remind
myself, hey, take the responsibility in
your hands. Take the means in your
hands. You are in control of your life.
Maybe not fully because there's always
this destiny or divine uh purpose of us
being here and the karma from past lives
and etc. That's another conversation.
But what you can control, focus on that.
The other things is just you know it's
in God's hands and it's in the hands of
other people and how that all interacts.
But I believe that when you're training
yourself to think good thoughts and it
comes back to you. It's the the law of
attraction and the law of giving and
taking and comes back, you know, you
become what you think, right? And so
there's there's true power in that. And
 Make Your Mark on This World
I feel like like you trying to make
other people feel better, you know,
whether it's mentally or physically
uh through supplements, through this
pod, through this podcast, through
talking, through, you know, sharing the
journey, sharing the maybe some hacks
and techniques and stuff that they can
do.
Yeah. You know, in the end of the day,
that's actually what drives and I feel
like it drives you a lot, you know,
because it gives the purpose on purpose.
It gives you purpose in your life. It's
not like only about yourself and what
you do and the achievements and the fame
and money and everything. What's the
legacy? What do you leave behind? How do
people, you know, benefit from you and
what you say, what you do, what you
create? So, that's a kind of a driving
force. It's it's really about how you
make your mark in the world.

 

