Exploring the factorial structure of the Sport Anxiety Scale-2: Invariance across language, gender, age and type of sport
Yago Ramis, Carme Viladrich, Catarina Sousa and Caroline Jannes

Abstract
Background: This study evaluates the metric and scalar invariance of the Sport Anxiety Scale-2 (SAS-2), which is considered one of the best sport performance anxiety assessment tools for child and adolescent athletes, across four sampling variables: language, gender, age and type of sport. Method: The participants were 842 athletes (Mage = 11.73, SD = 2.20) from Spain, Belgium and Portugal, each of whom completed the language-adapted version of the SAS-2. Confirmatory factor analysis was used to test the invariance of the measurement model, and the relative importance of the sampling variables was assessed using a multiple indicator multiple causes model (MIMIC). Results: The results revealed metric and scalar invariance across all sampling variables and null to modest effects of gender, age and type of sport as covariates for the factors of the SAS-2. However, there was a marked effect (ß = -.56) of language on worry, which reflected lower scores on this factor for the Flemish sample. Conclusions: The results of this study provide evidence of the invariance of the SAS-2 across samples, thereby endorsing the reliability of its factorial structure for future multi-group research. Keywords: Anxiety, youth sport, CFA, MIMIC.
Exploración de la estructura factorial de la Escala de Ansiedad Competitiva SAS-2: invariancia a través de lenguaje, género, edad y tipo de deporte.
Antecedentes: este estudio evalúa la invariancia métrica y escalar de la Escala de Ansiedad Competitiva-2 (SAS-2), considerada una de las mejores herramientas de evaluación de la ansiedad competitiva en niños y adolescentes, a través de cuatro variables muestrales: lenguaje, género, edad y tipo de deporte. Método: los participantes fueron 842 deportistas (Medad = 11.73; DE = 2.20) de España, Bélgica y Portugal, que completaron la versión adaptada del SAS-2. Se utilizó un análisis factorial con firmatorio para analizar la invariancia del modelo de medida y se llevó a cabo un modelo de múltiples indicadores y múltiples causas (MIMIC) para evaluar la importancia relativa de las variables muestrales. Resultados: los resultados revelaron invariancia métrica y escalar a través de todas las variables muestrales y efectos nulos o moderados de género, edad y tipo de deporte como covariables de los factores del SAS-2. Sin embargo, se detectó un efecto notable (ß = -.56) del lenguaje sobre la preocupación, reflejando niveles menores de este factor en la versión flamenca. Conclusiones: los resultados de este estudio proporcionan pruebas de la invariancia del SAS-2 entre muestras, certificando la fiabilidad de su estructura factorial para futuras investigaciones multigrupo. Palabras clave: ansiedad, deporte de iniciación, CFA, MIMIC.
Psicothema 2015, Vol. 27, No. 2, 174-181 doi: 10.7334/psicothema2014.263 Received: November 17, 2014 • Accepted: March 6, 2015 Corresponding author: Yago Ramis Dep. Psicologia Bàsica, Evolutiva i de l’Educació. Edifici B Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 08193 Barcelona (Spain) e-mail: yago.ramis@uab.cat
In the environment of sports and sports competition, recreational and social evaluative aspects are simultaneously present (e.g., Miller, 2012). This characteristic makes competitive situations potentially anxiogenic, particularly for children, who have yet to develop an established repertoire of coping strategies. Consequently, anxiety is one of the most frequently studied topics in sports psychology and continues to be a major focus of investigation for researchers and consultants worldwide (e.g., Woodman & Hardy, 2003). Competitive anxiety is defined as sport-specific trait anxiety that regularly appears before or during competition (Martens, 1977). This context-specific approach complements the dual conceptualization of state-trait anxiety proposed by Spielberger (1966). Multidimensional anxiety theory (Martens, Burton, Vealey, Bump, & Smith, 1990) holds that competitive anxiety, such as state and trait anxiety, can occur at the somatic or cognitive level. Somatic anxiety refers to bodily reactions to over-activation, such as muscular tension, whereas cognitive anxiety refers to thought content, such as worries related to the potential consequences of poor performance. Two questionnaires have been developed based on the above theory. The Competitive State Anxiety Inventory-2 (CSAI-2; Martens et al., 1990) focuses on the situational occurrence of the phenomenon, and the Sport Anxiety Scale-2 (SAS-2; Smith, Smoll, Cumming, & Grossbard, 2006) focuses on sport-specific trait anxiety, originally defined by Martens. While the study of state anxiety provides relevant information about an athlete’s assessment of the competition, competitive trait anxiety (also called sport performance anxiety) provides information about an athlete’s predisposition to respond to competition with state anxiety, which is a performance-related fear-of-failure construct (Smith, Smoll, & Passer, 2002).
To design individualized interventions for athletes, research in the field of competitive anxiety has focused on identifying differences in anxiety symptoms across groups that differ by gender, age or type of sport. With respect to gender, female athletes typically report higher levels of global competitive trait anxiety (Abrahamsen, Roberts, & Pensgaard, 2008; Martens et al., 1990), factors related to worries (Grossbard, Smith, Smoll, & Cumming, 2009) and precompetitive state anxiety (Thatcher, Thatcher, & Dorling, 2004). Moreover, some researchers suggest that gender serves as a moderator between the antecedents and consequences of anxiety. Specifically, moderating effects have been observed between the motivational climate and anxiety (Grossbard, Cumming, Standage, Smith, & Smoll, 2007) and between anxiety and performance (Woodman & Hardy, 2003). With respect to age, research has focused on the increasing competitive demands associated with age and has observed slightly higher levels of cognitive anxiety in older athletes (Craft, Magyar, Becker, & Feltz, 2003). However, these studies have also found that older athletes exhibit better coping strategies and are more likely than their younger counterparts to perceive this type of anxiety as facilitating their performance (Craft et al., 2003; Cruz, Dias, & Fonseca, 2010). With respect to the effect of the type of sport (i.e., individual versus team sports), studies have primarily focused on state anxiety. In their classic study, Simon and Martens (1979) found that athletes who participate in individual sports such as gymnastics report higher state anxiety levels than do athletes in team sports such as basketball. Consistent with this research, Kirby and Liu’s (1999) study of Chinese athletes found that track and field participants report higher somatic anxiety and lower self-confidence than do basketball players. When the type of sport has been examined as a moderator variable, a meta-analysis of the relationship between the CSAI-2 and performance (Craft et al., 2003) has revealed a moderating effect of sport type such that cognitive and somatic anxiety exert a greater influence on performance in individual sports. Therefore, a review of the previous research indicates that most previous studies have focused on the effect of single variables on state anxiety rather than trait anxiety and that few studies have compared the simultaneous effect of multiple variables on competitive trait anxiety.
As noted above, the SAS-2 originated as a competitive trait anxiety measure based on multidimensional anxiety theory that assesses both somatic and cognitive symptoms of sport performance anxiety. The factor structure of the SAS-2 consists of three subscales: (1) a somatic anxiety factor, which evaluates the physiological elements of hyper-activation, such as muscle tension or stomach uneasiness; (2) the cognitive subscales of worry, which assess concerns associated with poor performance; and (3) concentration disruption, which detects difficulties in focusing on relevant aspects of the competitive activity. The item length and content of the SAS-2 have been adapted to be appropriate for children (Smith et al., 2006), and studies have confirmed that it exhibits good psychometric properties for both child and adult samples (Grossbard et al., 2007). As a result, the SAS-2 is viewed as one of the best assessment instruments for child and adolescent athletes (Harris, Blom, & Visek, 2013). In addition, the Spanish version of the questionnaire exhibited good psychometric properties in a study assessing competitive anxiety in Spanish child and adolescent athletes (Ramis, Torregrosa, Viladrich, & Cruz, 2010), and the questionnaire has exhibited good psychometric properties in validation studies of the Flemish- (Jannes, De Pelsemaeker, De Deken, & Van Damme, 2011) and Portuguese- language versions (Sousa, Gomes, Torregrosa, Viladrich, & Cruz, 2011) of the questionnaire. The above-mentioned studies validating the SAS-2 have included widely accepted procedures, such as translation and back-translation, expert judgment on construct equivalence and psychometric data on internal structure, construct validity and reliability. However, to confirm the equivalence of the different language versions and the comparability of scores across countries, evidence of measurement equivalence based on cross-cultural methods is also required (e.g., Marsh, Nagengast, & Morin, 2013). Due to the multidimensional nature of the SAS-2, measurement invariance based on confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) is the procedure of choice (e.g., Millsap, 2011). In addition, although studies have separately investigated the effects of gender, age and type of sport on competitive anxiety, a more comprehensive understanding is achieved by assessing the relative effect of each factor when all are included in a single analysis using a multiple indicators multiple causes (MIMIC) model (Jöreskog & Goldberger, 1975). In this study, a MIMIC model was used to perform a multiple regression of the three SAS-2 factors on gender, age, language and type of sport to compare group means and determine the relative effects of these variables on the factors of somatic anxiety, worry, and concentration disruption.
To further our knowledge of competitive trait anxiety in youth sports and the psychometric properties of the SAS-2 questionnaire, the current study focused on the following goals: first, to validate the psychometric strengths of the SAS-2 by examining its configural, metric and scalar invariance across gender, age group, type of sport, and three languages; second, to use a MIMIC model to assess differences in competitive trait anxiety among subsamples by comparing the latent mean scores of these groups; and third, to use this MIMIC model to examine the relative contribution of each study variable to self-reported competitive anxiety.
Method
Participants
The participants were 842 athletes (46% female) from Spain, Belgium and Portugal. The athletes ranged in age from 7 to 18 years. As some authors have suggested that cognitive-somatic discrimination might emerge as chronological age increases (see Grossbard et al., 2009), we generated three subsamples of equal size (<11 years; 11-13 years; and >13 years). All participants met the inclusion criteria of regularly practicing and competing in organized sports: 461 in individual sports (e.g., athletics, sailing, judo) and 381 in team sports (e.g., handball, football, water polo). Twenty-three sports were included in the study, and the most represented were basketball (n = 129), gymnastics (n = 113) and swimming (n = 111). Table 1 provides descriptive information for the sample grouped by country.
Instruments
The Sport Anxiety Scale-2 (SAS-2; Smith et al., 2006) is a 15-item questionnaire that assesses the competitive trait anxiety experienced by athletes before or during competition. The scale includes three factors: somatic anxiety, worry and concentration disruption. Participants rate each item related to the statement “Before or while I compete in sports” (e.g., “my body feels tense”; “I worry that I will not play my best”; “it is hard to focus on what I am supposed to do”) on a four-point Likert scale ranging from one (not at all) to four (very much). The score for each subscale is calculated as the mean of the scores of subscale items and varies from one to four, with a low score indicating a less intense form of that type of competitive anxiety and a high score indicating a high probability of exhibiting that type of anxiety. The items of the original version of the SAS-2 and the Spanish, Flemish and Portuguese versions are presented in Table 2.
Procedure
The current research was developed in accordance with the Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct of the American Psychological Association (APA, 2010) as well as the principles of the ethical boards of all participating universities.
Questionnaire administration. After initially contacting club coordinators to request that they participate in our research, we contacted coaches to arrange a date and location to administer the questionnaire. The administration protocol required that two researchers always be present during the procedures to answer participants’ questions and ensure that all steps of the protocol were followed. All athletes were informed of the confidentiality of data and voluntarily participated in the investigation. No important incidents occurred during administration of the questionnaire, and athletes were able to continue with their usual practice routines after they finished responding.
Data analysis
In this section, we describe the results of the preliminary analyses with regard to the following: the internal consistency, data normality and CFA of the three SAS-2 factors for each language version; the procedures used to perform the invariance test for language, gender age and type of sport; and the MIMIC procedure used to test the relative contribution of the variables to trait competitive anxiety.
Preliminary analyses. Using SPSS 17.0 (SPSS, 2008), internal consistency was assessed using Cronbach’s alpha coefficients and inter-item correlations, and a normality test assessed skewness and kurtosis. Separate CFAs of the SAS-2 were performed for the Spanish (SPA), Flemish (FLE) and Portuguese (POR) subsamples using MPlus 7.0 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-2012). Based on the original model of Smith et al. (2006), we tested a three-factor CFA model in which all 15 SAS-