The Relationship Between Self-talk and Flow Experiences in Endurance Athletes
Rachel E. Taylor
A Thesis Submitted to the Faculty of the Graduate School at Middle Tennessee State University in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Masters of Arts in Psychology Murfreesboro, TN May 2014
ii Acknowledgements I would like to express my deepest appreciation to my advisor, Dr. Thomas M. Brinthaupt, who has allowed me to explore myself as a student and researcher during my time at Middle Tennessee State University. Additionally, I would like to thank my professor and committee chair member, Dr. John Pennington for teaching me to become a critical thinker and researcher. Without the guidance and encouragement from both Dr. Brinthaupt and Dr. Pennington, this thesis would not have been possible. More personally, however, I would not have gained the experience, knowledge, and passion I have throughout the last two years. I would like to thank my third committee member, Dr. William Compton, whose knowledge and personal encouragement assisted in the success of this thesis. I could not go without thanking my life mentor, Coach Aaron Russell, for allowing me to use his athletes as participants. In addition, I would like to thank his wife, Dr. Jody Russell, for helping me with the staff at Lock Haven University. Furthermore, I would like to thank both of them for providing a place for me to stay during data collection. The endless support, encouragement and love from both Coach Russell and Dr. Russell have been overwhelming. I could not have completed this thesis without them. I thank the faculty of both Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania and Mansfield University for their cooperation. I also would like to thank the runners for their willingness to participate and help complete my thesis. Finally, I would like to thank the following people: My fiancé, Mitch, my family, Mom, Dad, Ben, and Sarah, and my friend, Megan. Without the endless support and encouragement to follow my dreams, I would not have made it through this program or through this thesis. My greatest love and appreciation goes out to you all.
iii Abstract Sport and exercise researchers have examined numerous factors that influence athletic performance. Amongst those factors are self-talk and flow, which are typically studied independently of each other. The current study examined and compared different types of self-talk as predictors of experiencing flow in endurance athletes. Based on prior research in both self-talk (e.g., Tod, Hardy, & Oliver, 2011) and flow (e.g., Weinberg, Miller, & Horn, 2012), it was hypothesized that motivational self-talk would be a better predictor for experiencing flow compared to instructional self-talk. Additionally, a negative correlation between negative self-talk and flow experiences was expected compared to positive self-talk. Forty-five NCAA runners from two Pennsylvania university teams served as participants, each competing in mid- to long-distance races. At the end of each race, self-talk and flow measures were completed. Results yielded strong support for both hypotheses: a significant, positive relationship between motivational self-talk and flow experiences and a significant, negative relationship between negative self-talk and flow experiences. These findings add to current literature in the realm of sport and exercise psychology. Flow is a positive experience and influential to athletic performance; thus, it is important to understand the type of self-talk that might inhibit or facilitate flow experiences.
iv Table of Contents Section Subsections Page Number List of Tables vi List of Appendices vii Chapter I: Introduction Defining Self-talk Types and Functions of Self-Talk In Athletes The Concept of Flow Experiences The Effects of Flow on Athletic Performance State of Problem and Hypotheses 1 2 3 8 10 13 Chapter II: Method Participants Measures Procedure 17 17 17 21 Chapter III: Results Descriptive Statistics Test of the Hypotheses 23 23 26 Chapter IV: Discussion 29 Limitations and Future Research 32 Summary 34
v References 36 Appendices 43
vi List of Tables Table Page Number Table 1. Descriptive Statistics 23 Table 2. Summary of Intercorrelations Among Study Variables in Total Sample 25 Table 3. Summary of Correlations Between Self-talk Measures and DFS-2 Subscales 26 Table 4. Summary of Multiple Regression Analysis for Motivational Self-talk and Instructional Self-talk Measures Predicting Flow 27 Table 5. Summary of Multiple Regression Analysis for Positive, Negative, Irrelevant Self-talk Measures Predicting Flow 27 Table 6. Summary of Multiple Regression Analysis for All Self-talk Measures Predicting Flow 28
vii List of Appendices Appendix Page Number Appendix A: Consent Form and IRB Approval Letters 44 Appendix B: Objective Measures 50 Appendix C: Motivational Self-talk Measure 52 Appendix D: Instructional Self-talk Measure 54 Appendix E: Positive, Negative, Irrelevant Self-talk Measure 55 Appendix F: Dispositional Flow State Scale-2 57 Appendix G: Flow Questions 61
1 CHAPTER I Introduction Athletes are continuously searching for ways to improve performance and productivity in their sport. Beyond the physical preparation, there are a number of mental factors that are necessary for consideration in order to enhance optimal performances. According to some of the most recent research conducted by sport psychologists, there are several factors that help athletes improve their mental capacities in both training and competition. Some of these include increased confidence levels (Maynard, Smith, & Warwick, 1995), lowered anxiety levels (Hatzigeorgiadis, Zourbanos, Mpoumpaki, Theodorakis, 2009), and the proper use of self-talk (Hatzigeorgiadis, Zourbanos, Galanis, & Theodorakis, 2011). Additionally, researchers have found that athletes who experience flow perform better than those who do not (Csíkszentmihályi, 1975; Kawataba & Mallett, 2011). Consequently, these topics have generated much interest from researchers, coaches, and athletes. Although researchers have studied the relationships of self-talk and flow independently, there has been no systematic analysis of the two together. Both self-talk and flow have been found to be crucial components of athletic performance, making an examination of their possible relationship a worthwhile project. Drawing on previous literature addressing each concept independently, the present study will attempt to understand various self-talk types in regards to the likelihood of athletes experiencing a state of flow. First, an explanation of previous literature conducted on the concept of self- talk will be provided. In continuation to the general overview of the self-talk literature, a more narrow description of self-talk will be reviewed in regards to athletes. Following the
2 self-talk discussion, the concept of flow and flow in regards to sport and exercise will be described. Finally, a layout of the possible relationship between both self-talk and flow in athletics will be presented. Defining Self-talk The concept of self-talk has been persistently researched through recent decades in an attempt to understand its broad importance, frequency, and content. Bunker, Williams, and Zinsser (1993) offered a general description of self-talk as any type of individual thought. Due to the vagueness of their view, other researchers have considered more precise definitions of self-talk (Hackfort & Schwenkmezger, 1993; Hardy, 2006; Theodorakis, Weinberg, Natsis, Douma, & Kazakas, 2000). For example, Theodorakis et al. allocated self-talk into two different behaviors: covert or overt. According to this definition, overt self-talk is a verbalization made aloud to one’s self while covert is considered inner speech. Furthermore, Hackfort and Schwenkmezger (1993) argued that self-talk involves multiple purposes such as the process and interpretation of feelings and perceptions. Self-talk may serve as a self-regulatory system, a means to changing evaluations and convictions, and can be both instructional and reinforcing. The result of using self- talk for these different functions is then indicative of later behavior (Bandura, 1977, 1991; Ellis, 1962). Specifically, Bandura (1977) explained the use of self-statements as a means of cognitive insight. That is, through the cognitive processes of self-reflection and self-regulation, people develop a sense of agency and motivation to think and behave in specific ways. Ellis (1962) postulated that self-directed statements determine the way in which an individual responds emotionally which in turn influences behaviors in various
3 situations. More recent researchers have attempted to understand the different types of self-talk in this manner. For example, Brinthaupt, Hein, and Kramer (2009) developed the Self-Talk Scale. This scale measures the functions of self-talk in four categories: self- criticism, self-management, self-reinforcement, and social assessment. The above definitions of self-talk help piece together what self-talk is and its likely purposes. Hardy’s (2006) review of self-talk research and literature in sport and exercise psychology highlighted the most prominent and scientifically supported definition of self-talk. Hardy offered the following guidelines, which define self-talk from a collection of previous work: Self-talk involves verbalization or self-statements that have interpretive elements. It is both multidimensional and dynamic in nature. Finally, self-talk in the sport and exercise domains serves two major functions, instructional and motivational. In summary, self-talk has been found to be influential in a variety of ways. Having both positive and negative applications, its self-regulatory and self-reflective demeanor has been viewed as crucial for future thoughts and behavior. Thus, psychologists in a variety of domains have attempted to better understand the importance and application of self-talk. Types and Functions of Self-talk In Athletes Sport and exercise psychologists have conducted a large amount of research on self-talk in elite and non-elite athletes (Hardy, Gammage, & Hall, 2001; Highlen & Bennett, 1983; Moran, 1996). Hatzigeorgiadis et al. (2011) conducted a meta-analysis of studies of self-talk in the sport domain. Their results exemplified the importance of understanding the effects of self-talk and self-talk interventions on task performances in
4 different sports. More specifically, it was confirmed that self-talk is an effective strategy for enhancing task performances. For example, Hatzigeorgiadis, Theodorakis, and Zourbanos (2004) concluded that self-talk may have the ability to help lower levels of cognitive distractions and help athletes focus on the task at hand. Hamilton, Scott, and MacDougall’s (2007) research on the use of self-talk is just one example of how certain types of self-talk serve a positive function in performance. This particular research found that positive and negative types of self-talk interventions helped improve performance amongst cyclists. Research similar to Hamilton et al.’s (Moran, 1996) suggests that self- talk is often a form of praise to athletes, helping individuals to stay focused on the present, rather than on the future or past. Two kinds of self-talk frequently examined in athlete use are positive and negative self-statements. However, there have been contradicting results with respect to the benefits of each type of self-talk. Whereas positive self-talk has been noted as an enhancement for performance, negative self-talk has also been found to result in the same effects for athletes. Specifically, researchers such as Dargou, Gauvin, and Halliwell (1992) found support that positive self-talk improves performance. In addition, Van Raalte, Brewer, Riveria, and Petitpas (1994) measured self-talk in youth tennis players using the Self-talk and Gestures Rating Scale and determined that match winners used less negative self-talk. Nonetheless, there was no difference on the use of positive self- talk between winners and losers in their study. Prior to this particular study, Highlen and Bennett (1983) found that negative self-talk could improve performance. Overall, it appears that the effects of positive and negative self-talk may vary in terms of personality and sport. Tod, Hardy, and Oliver (2011) reviewed a number of studies that illustrated
5 this variation. First, negative self-talk may not have a detrimental effect on motor skill performance because some negative self-talk may be perceived as positive. Additionally, these researchers indicated that positive self-talk does not necessarily make for a better performance. Tod and colleagues concluded that more research needs to be conducted in the specific realm of the effects of negative self-talk. Due to the unclear conclusion of research on the effects of positive and negative self-talk, researchers have looked beyond these types to better understand the relationship between athletic performance and self-talk. For example, Hardy et al. (2001) conducted a qualitative study on the what, why, where, and when of self-talk. The findings of this study helped answer these questions and determined that self-talk was used for both instructional and motivational purposes. Other researchers have verified this idea (Theodorakis et al., 2000; Hatzigeorgiadis et al., 2004) and expanded the research in other domains such as Brinthaupt et al.’s (2009) work on the Self-Talk Scale. Some research addresses how and when different types of self-talk might have more of a positive or negative affect on athletic performance. For example, Fitts and Potsner (1967) suggested that the early stages of learning a skill or sport promote more frequent use of instructional talk. Later, once the skill and practice have accumulated enough for the athlete, less cognitive activity is needed and performance becomes more automated. Thus, self-talk, at least in its instructional form, is less commonly used. It is possible that motivational self-talk might become more frequent and useful than instructional self-talk for more automated skills. However, to my knowledge, no research has addressed this possibility.
6 Instructional self-talk typically involves skill- and strategy-related self-directed statements (Weinberg, Miller, & Horn, 2012). Motivational self-talk is more multi- faceted, however. This type of self-talk refers to experiences such as arousal, mastery, and drive. Arousal self-talk refers to relaxation, psyching oneself up, and controlling arousal levels. Mastery self-talk refers to maintaining focus, mental toughness, confidence, and mental preparation. Finally, self-statements referred to as drive help assist athletes in keeping on track to achieve goals. Other researchers have suggested that the effects of self-talk on performance might vary as a function of the task being performed (Theodorakis et al., 2000). In precision-based tasks, a person focuses on technical, tactical and kinesthetic aspects of the performance or movement and may benefit from instructional self-talk. Examples of precision-based sports may include sports such as basketball or baseball. This instructional self-talk is useful in directing one action to