Evaluation of Mindful Sport Performance Enhancement (MSPE): A New Approach to Promote Flow in Athletes
Keith A. Kaufman, Carol R. Glass, and Diane B. Arnkoff
Catholic University of America
The construct of mindfulness appears to be compatible with theories of flow and peak performance in sport. The present study assessed how Mindful Sport Performance Enhancement (MSPE), a new 4-week program, affected flow states, performance, and psychological characteristics of 11 archers and 21 golfers from the community. Participants completed trait measures of anxiety, perfectionism, thought disruption, confidence, mindfulness, and flow. They additionally provided data on their performances and state levels of mindfulness and flow. Analyses revealed that some significant changes in dimensions of the trait variables occurred during the training. Levels of state flow attained by the athletes also increased between the first and final sessions. The findings suggest that MSPE is a promising intervention to enhance flow, mindfulness, and aspects of sport confidence. An expanded workshop to allot more time for mindfulness practice is recommended for future studies.
While studies on the characteristics of flow states and their relation to peak performance exist, little is known about the dynamics by which flow states emerge and develop over time. The current paper qualitatively explores the necessary pre-conditions to enter flow, and the development of flow over time until its termination. Using an elicitation interview, participants (10 athletes and 12 musicians) were asked to recall their flow experiences in sports or music performances. The analysis resulted in the identification of the following three phases that athletes and musicians experience during flow: (1) Preparation to enter flow; (2) Entry into the flow state and; (3) Exit from the flow state. These three phases are characterized by several sub-themes contributing to the experience of flow. The function of emotions is crucial, as they play a core role across all three phases and regulate flow over time. The findings provide insights into the phenomenological characteristics of the transition and maintenance of the three proposed phases and the temporal dynamics of flow.
Keywords: flow experience, qualitative study, elicitation interview, dynamics of flow, role of emotions INTRODUCTION Athletes, artists, and musicians all aspire to enter and maintain a state of flow when performing or competing. When experiencing flow, performers feel at their best and often reach their highest level ( Palomäki et al., 2021 ). Flow state theory is grounded in the field of positive psychology and originated with Csikszentmihalyi (1990) , the founder of the concept, who defined flow as a particular state of optimal activation in which participants are completely immersed in their activity ( Csikszentmihalyi, 1975 ; Demontrond and Gaudreau, 2008 ). Flow is multidimensional and is felt when performers could be described as self-sufficient ( Demontrond and Gaudreau, 2008 ) while engaging in an activity that is important for them ( Csikszentmihalyi, 1990 ). Performers describe flow as becoming at “one” with the activity leading them to enter another reality in which they are entirely absorbed by what is being undertaken ( MacDonald et al., 2006 ). Flow is composed of cognitive, physiological, and affective factors ( Habe et al., 2019 ), and is characterized by a balance between the perceived challenges or opportunities for action that stretch but do not overmatch existing skills, and clear goals and immediate feedback about the progress being made ( Csikszentmihalyi and Nakamura, 2002 ). The individual who experiences flow feels great joy and happiness and aims to relive this experience ( Csikszentmihalyi and Bouffard, 2017 ). According to Csikszentmihalyi (1990) , the experience of flow can be characterized by the following nine dimensions: (1) a challenge–skills balance to feel engaged but not overwhelmed; (2) clear objectives allowing one to concentrate on the current task and knowing what is coming next, while reducing distractions and stress; (3) an action- awareness merging, meaning the person is completely absorbed by the situation; (4) clear and unambiguous feedback, implying that they know what they are doing at all times when experiencing flow; (5) a high, task-related, concentration that absorbs the person in the activity without being distracted by unrelated things; (6) an absolute sense of control; (7) a loss of self- consciousness, leading to the person being so immersed in the activity that there is a lack of ego-oriented protection; (8) the transformation of time, meaning that the time either slows down or flies by when experiencing flow; and, finally (9) an autotelic experience, as the activity becomes an end in itself. Experiencing these dimensions lead performers to feel totally immersed in the activity and have the feeling that no effort is required ( Harris et al., 2017 ). Some scholars have criticized the concept of flow for its vagueness (see Harris et al., 2017 ). However, the reshaped multidimensional description of flow, reported above within the framework of the nine dimensions, presents flow as a less frequent and more specific event, which closely aligns with the reality of the phenomenon ( Csikszentmihalyi and Bouffard, 2017 ), and arguably is more easily measured and assessed. Flow Within Athletes and Musicians The concept of flow has attracted researchers from different areas and has been studied across a wide range of fields, such as work and leisure ( Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre, 1989 ), teaching ( Diaz and Silveira, 2012 ), dance ( Biasutti and Habe, 2021 ), theatre ( Martin and Cutler, 2002 ), music ( MacDonald et al., 2006 ), and athletics ( Kimiecik and Jackson, 2002 ; Sinnett et al., 2020 ). It has been shown that the experience of flow and performance are positively related across activities. In sports, the flow state has a strong positive relationship with the level of performance ( Csikszentmihalyi and Nakamura, 2002 ). In addition to being linked with high-quality performance, flow states are associated with confidence, the ease to which sport-specific actions are executed, and automaticity ( Harris et al., 2017 ). Flow, characterized as a state of optimal functioning ( Asakawa, 2004 ), allows a person to transcend one’s average and usual skill level to fully realize one’s potential. Flow also impacts the acquisition of new skills ( Csikszentmihalyi and LeFevre, 1989 ) and the improvement of skills ( Massimini and Carli, 1988 ). As a challenging activity is mastered, it becomes less involving, and the challenge it represents becomes simpler. To continue to experience a flow state, people must engage in more complex challenges, implying the development and improvement of their skills. Flow has been widely studied in a sports context ( Swann et al., 2015 ), with increased focus given to better understanding the specificities of this experience within this context of performance ( Chavez, 2008 ). Emotions seems have a core role in determining flow ( Rodgers and Tajet-Foxell, 2011 ). A model called the individual zones of optimal functioning (IZOF) was developed by Hanin (2000) as a reference for qualitative and quantitative examinations of the framework and function of emotional experiences related to successful or poor performances. A multidimensional description of performance-related psychobiosocial states, focusing on IZOF-based predictions of emotion–performance relationships, suggests tentative functional interpretations of emotion–performance relationships with an emphasis on their bi-directionality and interaction effects. Progressively, other domains have recently been interested in the concept of flow, particularly in artistic fields, such as music. In music, flow was mainly described in improvisation, interpretation, and composition, as musicians are often immersed in these activities. Biasutti (2017a , p. 5) explains that “[musicians] feel completely absorbed through a strong sense of identification with the music”. Flow is considered to be a common experience for musicians and scholars highlighted that flow states are experienced quite frequently by music students ( Sinnamon et al., 2012 ), and that the majority of professional classical orchestral musicians regularly experience flow ( Cohen and Bodner, 2019 ). However, unlike research in sports or occupational psychology, fewer studies have been devoted to the study of flow in the field of music ( Chirico et al., 2015 ). Researchers agree that it is an area in need of further investigation, given the benefits of achieving such a state, both for performance and for the way it is experienced ( Wrigley and Emmerson, 2011 ). Music research examined aspects related to the factors that contribute to flow experiences, the transmission and group experience of flow, the association of flow with a range of positive outcomes, and the psychophysiological aspects of flow ( Tan and Sin, 2021 ). In addition, topics covered in flow studies have included self-regulated behaviors and job resources. In classically trained musicians, flow was found to be a function of self-regulated behaviors, such as personal resources, with practice organization and self-regulation contributing to flow experience with indicators related to musical skills, tasks, the clarity of goals and feedback, concentration and control over the activities ( Araújo and Hein, 2016 ). Regarding music teachers and students, aspects of job resources, including performance feedback, autonomy, social support, and supervisory coaching all have a positive influence on the balance between teachers’ challenges and skills and contribute to the experience of flow ( Bakker, 2005 ). Experiencing flow has many beneficial consequences for performers’ wellbeing. Flow state is associated with a positive experience and leads to great pleasure in carrying out the activity and its associated feeling of fulfillment ( Csikszentmihalyi, 1990 ). As Csikszentmihalyi (1990 , p. 6) argued, “if a person sets out to achieve a difficult enough goal, from which all other goals logically follow and if he or she invests all the energy in developing skills to reach that goal, then actions and feelings will be in harmony and the separate parts of life will fit together and each activity will make sense in the present, as well as in view of the past and the future.” Therefore, an important challenge is to understand the parameters that lead to the attainment of flow ( Csikszentmihalyi, 2004 ). Challenges to Achieving Flow According to Csikszentmihalyi (1999) , flow is not a phenomenon that can be consciously triggered by a person’s will. With that said, there are factors that can facilitate its emergence ( Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi, 1999 ). Accordingly, flow states would be more easily accessible if the necessary conditions to enter flow are facilitated ( Csikszentmihalyi, 1999 ). We can wonder if it is possible to achieve flow at all stages of learning. This leads to an important question: what exactly are the conditions that lead to a higher probability of achieving flow? Recent research has shown that appropriate practice generates a certain control over the emergence of flow in athletes or musicians ( Jackson and Csikszentmihalyi, 1999 ). Factors such as being focused and convinced that nothing is more important than the experience in question, having the right skills for the demands of the task, and being able to direct one’s attention to the task at hand during the activity ( Biasutti, 2017a ) are some conditions that must be fulfilled to experience flow. Biasutti (2017a) also suggests that having clear mental plans for the performance and knowing all the variables in advance can help the performer attain a flow state. Kirchner (2011) posited that there can be a tendency to experience flow if certain predispositions are met that enable flow to emerge. He identified five constitutive dispositions of this tendency to experience a flow state: self-confidence, the desire to experiment and express something through the activity, having goals, the ability to maintain one’s attention, and the ability to perform without self-criticism. Flow can be experienced at several levels, with the highest form occurring during the activity itself. The normal concept of flow is considered as a state characterized by a natural and regular “challenge–skills balance” experience allowing performers to be absorbed in their experience, but to still be able to have some kind of “action-awareness.” The ultimate experience of flow could include a transcendental experience in which performers are often described as being in a trance-like state. While experiencing flow, performers have an increased in skills and achieve their maximum potential. This ascent, whether technical, personal, or mental, is influenced by the situation. Flow states are experienced during judged performances (e.g., concerts and competitions), which can act as flow facilitators ( Biasutti, 2017a ). On the other hand, an unfavorable environment, as well as internal factors like anxiety and impatience all have the ability to hinder the emergence of flow. Flow states and the music performance anxiety (MPA) could be considered antithetical experiences ( Cohen, and Bodner, 2019 ), and pre-performance anxiety could play a role in the achievement of optimal performance states ( Hanin, 2000 ; Kenny and Osborne, 2006 ; Rodgers and Tajet-Foxell, 2011 ). Several studies (see for example, Swann et al., 2016 , 2017 ) have led to a better understanding of how states of flow emerge and occur. Flow is considered a rare and elusive state ( Swann et al., 2015 ), with most knowledge based on factors simply associated with its occurrence (e.g., optimal environmental conditions) rather than causal mechanisms ( Aherne et al., 2011 ). Recent studies have explored the chronology of the onset of flow, suggesting that flow occurs in exploratory contexts involving novelty, discovery, uncertainty, or experimentation ( Swann et al., 2016 , 2017 ). In such contexts, flow emerges as a result of a gradual accumulation of