Arousal and Anxiety Level Influences on Golf Putting Performance
Chloe Paulsen, Ryan Yoder

Coastal Carolina University CCU Digital Commons Honors Theses Honors College and Center for Interdisciplinary Studies Summer 8-9-2019 Arousal and Anxiety Level Influences on Golf Putting Performance Chloe Paulsen Coastal Carolina University , cppaulsen@coastal.edu Ryan Yoder ryoder@coastal.edu Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.coastal.edu/honors-theses Part of the Cognitive Psychology Commons This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the Honors College and Center for Interdisciplinary Studies at CCU Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Honors Theses by an authorized administrator of CCU Digital Commons. For more information, please contact commons@coastal.edu. Recommended Citation Paulsen, Chloe and Yoder, Ryan, "Arousal and Anxiety Level Influences on Golf Putting Performance" (2019). Honors Theses . 342. https://digitalcommons.coastal.edu/honors-theses/342
Running head: AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 1 Arousal and Anxiety Level Influences on Golf Putting Performance By Chloe Paulsen Psychology, Exercise and Sports Science Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Bachelor of Science in the HTC Honors College at Coastal Carolina University Summer, 2019 Louis E. Keiner Director of Honors HTC Honors College Ryan M. Yoder Associate Professor Psychology Department College of Science
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 2 Abstract Arousal levels can help and hinder performance in various sports and many athletes manipulate arousal levels during practice or competitions. Professional golfers typically putt in complete silence but studies have shown that stimulus can help performance. Twelve participants completed general and sport anxiety questionnaires before completing 3 golf putts at a target under 30 seconds with a music stimulus for each group. Music stimulus had an affect on the moderate arousal level groups showing the best performance with the slowest time to complete the putting task. This shows that putting may be performed better with moderate auditory arousal to produce peak performance in competition atmospheres.
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 3 Arousal and Anxiety Level Influence on Golf Putting Performance Anxiety is an emotional response that includes feelings of tension, nervousness, and worry that is linked with an increased activation of the sympathetic nervous system and affects many people in the US population. Anxiety disorders affect about 19% of the US population in 2017, with women being twice more likely than men to be affected (2017). Anxiety influences behavior, cognition, and performance in a variety of situations among most people. The sympathetic nervous system is part of the autonomic nervous system that stimulates a fight or flight response. This fight or flight response may cause anxiety for a person depending on the severity of response itself, but this sympathetic response often times has a negative impact on performance for tasks that may not require increased anxiety levels. Anxiety responses differ per person in terms of overall anxiety and anxiety related to sport. This stimulation of the body in a negative way is considered somatic anxiety (Roberts, Hart, & Eastwood, 2016). The body feels these stressors and reacts to them, inducing increased heart rate, sweating, or blood pressure change. Behavior plays a role of trying to prevent these sensations from occurring by avoiding situations that may cause the stressor such as not going outside to avoid social interaction or wearing oversized clothes to cover the body to avoid judgment from others. In addition, cognition or cognitive anxiety can be defined as negative expectations and concerns about one’s self, a situation, and possible consequences that may occur (Martens, Burton, Vealey, Bump, & Smith, 1990, p. 541). This is the negative thoughts that come with a situation that may be concerning for a person and possibly induce stress. Cognitive processes include worrying and concentration disruption. In addition, affects of anxiety on behavior and cognition can influence performance. Arousal level appears as a component of anxiety (Smith, Smoll, Cumming, & Grossbard, 2006). Anxiety and arousal can be
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 4 considered interchangeable. It can flood the brain with sympathetic nervous system stimulation. In some cases this may increase performance, and in others it may hinder performance based on the person and the situation the person is involved in (Hardy & Hutchinson, 2007). Performance anxiety can come from many different aspects of life such as different types of training in relation to game time play, cognitive thinking before time of play, or even a person’s pre - performance routine (Hanton, Wadey, & Mellalieu, 2008). One arousal performance theory is the Inverted U Hypothesis. This is a theory on how moderate arousal is optimal for peak performance while low or high arousal hinders performance. It is thought that each person would perform the best at a “moderate” level (Yerkes & Dodson, 2007). The level of anxiety a person experiences will be not too high and not too low. This arousal is individualized per personal but still “moderate” to the individual. To counter this theory, there is the Individual Zones of Optimal Functioning theory. This theory claims that each individual person has a different level of arousal that produces his or her own peak performance (Hanin, 1997). This may not be moderate arousal but low or even high arousal. A person’s moderate arousal level could equate to another’s lo w arousal level for example, but the individuals are not necessarily at moderate arousal. McMillan and Osterhouse (1972) found each group to have more high and low anxiety levels influencing the task performed by the participants. Participants who had low arousal showed to have better testing performance than those who had moderate or high arousal levels, but over all each person had different anxiety/arousal levels as a stimulus. Arousal can be induced by many different variables, one of them being music. Music tempo and volume has been shown to affect heart rate, breathing rate, and blood pressure; and it can be used to affect arousal and relaxation (Bernardi, 2005). A study by Thompson,
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 5 Schellenberg, and Husain showed that classic Mozart music helps lower arousal in young adults (2001). Classical music is often used to calm babies when they are upset or cranky. Heavy metal, hard rock music that has a fast pace tempo has the opposite effect by in increasing heart rate, breathing rate, and blood pressure (Labbé, Schmidt, Babin, & Pharr, 2007). The variables involved will be anxiety/arousal level in general life as well as in a sports atmosphere, training level for putting, perceived putting performance outcome, and time taken to complete three putts out of 30 seconds. Different arousal theories have been used to analyze sport arousal such as the Inverted U Hypothesis and the Individualized Zones of Optimal functioning (IZOF) and will be used as a guide for analysis of arousal in this study (Pineschi & Di Pietro, 2013). Although these two theories are being evaluated, there is not significant evidence that suggests any specific arousal theory is more influential as theories are continuing to be developed (Raedeke & Stein, 1994). In summary, it is predicted that the IZOF theory is the accurate theory for this study. It is hypothesized that there will be a significant difference between the treatment groups and control group; lower averages, meaning better performance, are predicted to be performed by the moderate-high anxiety group verses the none or low anxiety group. Also, the control group is predicted to take more time to complete the task due to lower arousal/ anxiety levels. Method Participants The participant pool for the study is a convenience sample of students from Coastal Carolina University. Students range from being in their freshmen year to senior year, the average age being 23years old (±10.18), and were 75% females. The experiment opportunity will be
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 6 presented to student in the exercise science major to complete for extra credit by selected professors in the exercise science department at the university during his or her lecture periods. The lecturer will be requested to provide extra credit to students who participate in the study. Procedure Students will complete an informed consent form upon arrival. Paper questionnaires 1(Appendix A) and 2 (Appendix B) will be given to the students before they begin the experiment after completing the informed consent form. Each questionnaire will have a participant number. Once the questionnaires are completed, the examiner will collect them. The participants will be divided into an experiment group: treatment of “ low to moderate arousal ” (low-med) (low-med) or “ moderate to high arousal ” (med-high) , or the control group with “no arousal” . The “ moderate to high arousal ” groups will receive the treatment of hearing loud, heavy, rock music during their assessment. The “ low to moderate arousal ” group will receive the treatment of hearing the same music but a lower volume during the assessment. The control group will perform the task with no music playing at all. All students will have 5 practice golf putts at a given target on an indoor putting green for “ training ” purposes . After the training, the assessment will consist of the students attempting three golf putts on the same green, after they completed the training putts. The examiner will turn on the music just as they are about to attempt their first assessment putts for the treatment groups. The participants will have 30 seconds to complete all three test putts, being notified when 20 and 10 seconds are left. Once the experiment is completed, the subject will fill out questionnaire 3 (Appendix 3). This questionnaire will be collected upon completion. All three questionnaires should take about five to ten minutes in total to complete. The debriefing statement will be given along with a form to hand into the professor from the class they were recruited from. This paper will notify the
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 7 professor the student completed the study and will provide extra credit as incentive. A comparison will be done between the three groups based on overall performance scores. Measures Task performance . The participants will putt one ball at a time on an indoor putting green with a universal golf putter (left handed and right handed putter). When the ball stops rolling, the examiner will replace the ball with a marker to mark the balls location from the hole while being able to move the ball out of the way for the following putt. Once this is done with all three putts, the length of the marker to the putting hole will be measured for distance, in inches, for each marker. The distance will measure the level of performance. An average of the three distances will be taken to have one average score per participant. Closer to the putting hole indicates better performance rather than farther away (lower scores are preferred). A follow up questionnaire (questionnaire 3) will be given asking why they feel they performed the way they did. This questionnaire is a sport success measure with a few random questions to determine the students ’ perceived influence of his or her performance (Duda & Nicholls, 1992). Arousal. Participants will be experiencing different induced arousal levels based on their treatment group. Music level played during the task and the time constraint given will be the different arousal level or anxiety variables. Different music levels are intended to result in different anxiety and arousal responses that may affect performance outcomes (Hirokawa, 2004). Time constraint is intended to induce more performance pressure (Wirth &Carbon, 2017). Anxiety. Anxiety measures will be evaluated in two ways. First, sport anxiety will be measured to assess the anxiety level in athletic performance. A sport anxiety scale questionnaire (questionnaire 1) will be used to evaluate this measure consisting of 15 questions will be used that measures somatic arousal, worry, and concentration disruption, Cronbach’s α= .902 (Smith,
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 8 Smoll, Cumming, & Grossbard, 2006). Students will agree or disagree with the statements given on the survey in relation to how they feel under sport pressure (1= Not at all, 4 = Very much so). The second anxiety measure will be general anxiety to evaluate the over all general anxiety a person has on a day-to-day basis. The State-Trait Inventory for Cognitive and Somatic Anxiety questionnaire (questionnaire 2) will be used to measure this variable and be will answered preceding the sport anxiety scale, Cronbach’s α= .87 (Ree, French, MacLeod, & Locke, 2008). Students will answer 21 questions the same way by agreeing or disagreeing with the statements given (1= Not at all, 4 = Very much so). Higher scores will indicate high anxiety (max score = 144) while low scores indicate low anxiety or none at all (lowest score = 36). A correlation analysis will evaluate the variables, as done so in a study by Madrigal, Roma, Caze, Maerlender, and Hope (2018). The correlation will be between general and sport anxiety, sport anxiety and performance outcomes, and general anxiety and performance outcomes. Another correlation will be done between treatment group and time to complete the task. In addition to the questionnaires, demographics such as age, sex, and performance pressure experience will be collected. An indoor putting green with a putter and a golf ball will be used to complete the physical experiment. Results For each participant, age, sex class year, sport anxiety score, general anxiety score, total time to complete the task, and average putting score were collected. Five practice putts were given to each person and then three putts were performance for analysis. Four questions from the post questionnaire were reviewed that pertained to the study. We compared total scores for general anxiety questionnaire and sport anxiety questionnaire to determine if the two different types of anxiety are correlated. The mean for the
AROUSAL INFLUENCE ON PUTTING 9 general anxiety questionnaire is 40.75(±9.37), Kruskal Wallis H(2)=.038, p=.981 (Figure 1). The mean for the sport anxiety questionnaire is 32.33(±7.99), Kruskal Wallis H(2)=.03, p=.985 (Figure 2). Parametric tests also suggested that anxiety levels were similar between groups. General anxiety among groups showed similar, F(2,11)=.228, p=.801, as well as sport anxiety among groups, F(2